This thesis investigated the distribution and ecological factors of OrM across Europe using a combination of phylogenetic analysis, multivariate analysis and hierarchical/joint species distribution modelling techniques. I found that, overall, both PCA and NMDS grouped together the OrM identified from different orchid species. This would support the idea of the OrM as being as being generalist, in that they have broad distributions, but they associate with different orchid species. The extent to which orchids have specialized or generalized relationships with OrM is a still ongoing debate [#bailarote2012]. 

The phylogenetic analysis yielded low resolution results between individual OTUs from different OrM families. This was likely due to the different methods used to obtain the sequences, as the different primers allowed to polymerize different DNA areas, with only a partial overlap; this, coupled with the different trimming of the sequences done by the authors can explain the poor quality matrix that was so obtained. This piece of data would be crucial in properly understanding and framing the ecological evidence.

In the PCA most of the variance was explained by two variables, soil potassium and maximum precipitation of the wettest quarter, which means that those variables contribute the most to the definition of the niche of the OrM and that the orchids occur in places highly differentiated in those parameters. This could also be the result of the very broad sampling, and more research should be done on a smaller scale, as the potassium levels can dramatically vary even in a very small plot, often doubling in just a few meters [#bogunovic2014].

From the NMDS Russulaceae seemed to be more tolerant than other families to different environments, and despite the lower number of sampled individuals we witness a higher variance. This could mean that the Russulaceae are more generalist toward orchids, that they have a wider niche, that it's more ecologically flexible, it was sampled in a broader area or all of the above. Russulaceae are a very diverse family, but it is actually difficult to say that Russulaceae find a "niche" in the symbiosis with orchids, especially with Limodorum, as there doesn't seem to be any advantage for the fungus: this orchids seem to have an insufficient photosynthesis and to heavily rely on the OrM to provide not only minerals but also carbon-base chemicals; this also means that distribution of Limodorum may also be potentially constrained by the occurrence of its fungal symbionts [#girlanda2005].

Inocybaceae have a high variance too, probably because of the few sampled points (eleven); this is in contrast with more sampled OrM families, such as Tulasnellaceae and Ceratobasidiaceae, which show the lowest amount of variance, explainable by a more specialist niche, for the families themselves or for the orchids that host them. Serendipitaceae have a very low number of samples (two), but show nonetheless a variance comparable to the mean of all the families.

The HMSC analysis showed clearly that there are residual correlations between OrM taxa. To my knowledge, this shows for the first time that OrM have ecological interactions beyond what is explained by environmental variables. Members of Ceratobasidiaceae tend to have positive residual correlations among them, that is, is likely Ceratobasidiaceae OTUs to co-occur. In some other cases, there is a zero correlation, so they do not influence each other's presence. This is interesting as the most broadly sampled orchid included in this study, *Spiranthes spiralis*, is predominately associated with OTUs of Ceratobasidiaceae. It could be that the positive residual co-occurrence are the result of facilitation between taxa of Ceratobasidiaceae, which may in turn positively affect orchid occurrence at a particular site.
Inocybaceae, Sebacinaceae and Theleophoraceae show similar results but less pronounced, either because residual correlation was not as strong (as in the Theleophoraceae) or because the positive correlation trend is not as common.

In contrast with the Ceratobasidiaceae trend, and in accordance with the multivariate analyses, the residual co-occurrence of members of Russulaceae were mostly negatively correlated with the other families. This means that where we find Russulaceae, we are unlikely going to find other OrM, of any family. This is probably the result of the main orchid species where Russulas were found in this dataset, *Limodorum abortivum*, which seems to show a specialization toward this family [#girlanda2005]. A single OTU, identified as *rus18* in the present work, showed a general positive correlation also with other families.

Tulasnellaceae shows no residual correlations at all (zero) either between other OTUs of the same OrM family, or with OTUs of different families. 

The correlation between OrM and environmental variables in the HMSC model showed some shared patterns. Most of the OrM were positive correlated with the minimum temperature of the coldest quarter, in all families except Tulasnellaceae, which had a zero correlation (except for a single OTU, *tul5*). Two other trends stand out: the phosphorus and potassium soil content, which are generally negatively correlated with little exceptions.
Nitrogen is often considered a major community changer in the soil fungal communities, [#lilleskov2002] both because of the nitrogen itself and because it's considered a proxy to infer human impact, especially for agricultural reason. The model, however, show little correlation between the OrM and the soil nitrogen content, which could be explained as evidence of the little impact of nitrogen on the communities or as evidence of communities already changed in their composition by the nutrients content by selection, so that the resulting OrM are not as impacted.
The pH level was of little relevance, and so was the maximum precipitation, the reason for which should be subject of future studies, but it could be the effect of the limited sample size.

Variance partitioning for each OTUs of all the environmental values shows how for some variables there is a relevant difference between the OTUs, especially for the random effect (which was associated with the host orchid). Soil nitrogen and the maximum precipitation variable seem to vary the least, which is in line with the correlation plot: they are not good predictors of the kind of OrM that we could find in a place. Potassium and phosphorus have a higher relative variance.
This variables could therefore be considered the most useful in understanding the distribution of OrM, and may be a good starting point for further niche modelling.

The phylogenetic analysis didn't give significative results. This was likely due to the different methods used to obtain the sequences, as the different primers allowed to polymerize different DNA areas, with only a partial overlap; this, coupled with the different trimming of the sequences done by the authors can explain the poor quality matrix that was so obtained.
This piece of data would be crucial in properly understanding and framing the ecological evidence.

Do similar OrM taxa occur in similar habitats and have similar environmental preferences? Some taxa do, and in the same family there are shared correlations for environmental variables from the HMSC, while the NMDS analysis shows a narrow ecological niche with shared correlation to environmental variables in some families, e.g. Tulasnellaceae, Ceratobasidiaceae, Theleophoraceae, and a broader niche in others, in particular Russulaceae and Inocybaceae. This seems to be irrespective of the sample size. 

The correlation between the OTUs presence is quite robust, so there may be facilitation or competition processes happening between the OrM. Further studies are required to understand what the nature of these processes are, how much the OrM themselves are responsable for it and what is the importance of the orchid host in the process. It is also important to notice that the sampled orchids were of unknown age, likely adult as those are easier to sample. We do know that orchids change preferences for the fungal symbiont through life, and the ones identified in an adult plant are not necessarily those that will allow the seed to germinate [#meng2019], making those findings difficult to apply in a conservation plan.

These kind of studies are important for the understanding and protection of taxa that are not yet described. As I investigated OTUs in this study, it is not clear whether these taxa are true species. Improving soil ecosystem health is not something we can successfully do without knowing the key elements that allow important taxa such as fungi to function. Presently there is limited georeferenced studies that allow the pinpointing of mycorrhizal fungi in general to specific locations, resulting difficulty in performing analyses such as presented in this thesis.  The understanding of OrM ecology will always be incomplete without a better knowledge of the taxonomy of OrM. We lack a robust phylogenetic framework that allows adequate assessment of the phylogenetic relationships between fungal strains. This would need to start from a species concept for OrM [#jacquemyn2017]. Without this knowledge, we have limited ability to shed light on the evolutionary history of these OrM groups.
